Create rapid gossip sync blog post (#160)
lightningdevkit/lightningdevkit.org: docs/_blog/introducing-rapid-gossip-sync.md

---

> title: "Introducing Rapid Gossip Sync"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Need New Title - Rapid Gossip Sync"
```

While most Lightning implementations have mechanisms to quickly catch up to the latest block, one bottleneck that may remain is the exchange of aforementioned gossip, which rarely takes more than a couple of minutes but significantly impacts UX when initiating locally-routed payments from a mobile device. Assuming that an app remains closed until you need to send a payment, even a one-minute waiting period becomes a major payment flow disruptor. This issue is commonly resolved by sharing the intended payment recipient with a Lightning Service Provider, thus compromising privacy to offload the route calculation to a server.

For that reason, we're very excited to announce Rapid Gossip Sync, a protocol that allows nodes to catch up with channel gossip data by relying on semi-trusted servers. 

## Exchanging Gossip Today

Before we delve too deeply into the optimizations that Rapid Gossip Sync relies on, first a primer on how gossip works today. It involves three main message types: channel announcements, channel updates, and node announcements. (The last of which isn’t really relevant to this post.)

> As their names imply, channel announcements are sent when a public channel opens, and updates when changes are made to a channel. One peculiar characteristic of channels is that they aren't symmetrical: depending on the direction, some of their properties may vary. For instance, if Alice and Bob have a channel, Alice may charge higher fees for forwarding payments to Bob than vice versa, thus requiring that different channel updates be broadcast to the network for each direction. Just as balances may concentrate on one side, routing fees for forwarding payments through the channel are set by different parties depending on the direction. Unlike channel updates, channel announcements do not carry directional information, meaning opening a new channel requires sending at least two channel updates for direction-specific data.

Reviewer 2: thus requiring that different channel updates be broadcast to the network for each direction, **because channel announcements cannot contain directional data**.

Reviewer 2: let me edit that on Google. I am just now noticing that this information is conveyed a bit late in that paragraph.

> As their names imply, channel announcements are sent when a public channel opens, and updates when changes are made to a channel. One peculiar characteristic of channels is that they aren't symmetrical: depending on the direction, some of their properties may vary. For instance, if Alice and Bob have a channel, Alice may charge higher fees for forwarding payments to Bob than vice versa, thus requiring that different channel updates be broadcast to the network for each direction. Just as balances may concentrate on one side, routing fees for forwarding payments through the channel are set by different parties depending on the direction. Unlike channel updates, channel announcements do not carry directional information, meaning opening a new channel requires sending at least two channel updates for direction-specific data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As their names imply, channel announcements are sent when a public channel opens, and updates when changes are made to a channel. One peculiar characteristic of channels is that they aren't symmetrical: depending on the direction, some of their properties may vary. For instance, if Alice and Bob have a channel, Alice may charge higher fees for forwarding payments to Bob than vice versa. Unlike channel updates, channel announcements do not carry directional information, so that scenario would require that different channel updates be broadcast to the network for each direction. It also means that opening a new channel requires sending at least two channel updates for direction-specific data.
```

One of the noteworthy properties of gossip is that a lot of data is duplicated across messages. For example, each channel announcement and update contains the genesis block hash. Similarly, each channel announcement contains both nodes’ public keys, exacerbating data redundancy for well-connected nodes. So, to reduce bandwidth requirements, we decided to see if we could strip data to create a more efficient way of conveying the same information. 

> In the next few paragraphs, we'll outline a selection of the various improvements/optimizations we came up with. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the next few paragraphs, we'll outline a selection of the various optimizations we came up with. 
```

Considering that most mobile Lightning wallets communicate with their developers' servers, these concerns can be easily mitigated by deploying a Rapid Gossip Sync server to enable your mobile wallet to route privately without third parties or sacrificing UX. 

## Conclusion

Let's look at our data usage improvements with the above optimizations factored in.

Without Rapid Gossip Sync, we measured sync data using a random set of 80,000 channel announcements and 160,000 channel updates and identified an average of approximately 53MB. 

With Rapid Gossip Sync, a snapshot representing the same graph took up 4.7MB and, after gzip, only 2MB. The time to process and apply that snapshot on a mobile phone was less than 0.4 seconds. For more detailed numbers, please refer to the [Rapid Gossip Sync README](https://github.com/lightningdevkit/rust-lightning/tree/main/lightning-rapid-gossip-sync).

> We're excited for you to try Rapid Gossip Sync out and invite you to look at the server code. If you don't wish to operate a Rapid Gossip Sync snapshotting server, feel free to try our deployment, which is available at [rapidsync.lightningdevkit.org.](rapidsync.lightningdevkit.org.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're excited for you to try Rapid Gossip Sync out and invite you to look at the [server code](https://github.com/lightningdevkit/rapid-gossip-sync-server). If you don't wish to operate a Rapid Gossip Sync snapshotting server, feel free to try our deployment, which is available at [rapidsync.lightningdevkit.org.](rapidsync.lightningdevkit.org.)
```
